Yeah, you just want to
Right.
The meeting is resumed.
That's 1,000 if it ends.
So we're
hearing evidence in the Fisheries Amendment Bill.
We've got 12.
First up, we have
Steve Abel of the Green Party of Aotearoa New Zealand.
You've got-
Five
...
10 minutes.
How you use that time is up to you.
Suggest you leave some time for questions at the end.
Hard questions.
So away you go.
Tēnā koutou katoa. Thank you very much for the opportunity to present today.
I'm speaking on behalf of Green co-leader Chlöe
Swarbrick, who could not be with us this morning.
The Green Party are here today to emphasize to the committee
the public outrage at this Fisheries Amendment Bill.
While New Zealanders are demanding relief from a cost of living crisis,
this government has chosen to introduce a bill that fundamentally
alters the purpose and direction of fisheries management in
Aotearoa.
At its heart, this bill is about who this government works for.
And on that question, the answer is very clear.
This is a government that has not yet met a part of the environment
it won't try to open up, extract from, and convert
into short-term profit,
regardless of the long-term consequences and regardless of who pays the
price. Because the reality is the price is not
paid by industry. The price is paid by everyday New
Zealanders and by the environment.
It is paid by people who just want to go fishing with their whanau.
It is paid by our communities who rely on healthy
ecosystems, and it is paid by future generations who inherit what
we leave behind.
Here in Aotearoa, we pride ourselves on a simple idea that you
can go out and catch a feed for your family.
That access to a healthy, thriving ocean is part of what
makes this place special.
This bill undermines that very birthright.
It treats fisheries not as something we all share, but as something to be
maximized, traded, and exported.
And that brings me to a second point.
This is about public resources. Our oceans and the species
that live therein are being handed over to
private interests.
But this bill continues a pattern from this government that is shifting
control away from the public and towards a small number of
well-connected commercial players.
It entrenches the power of quota holders.
It reduces the obligation to provide for the public before
allocating to industry. And it pushes everyday New Zealanders
closer to the margins of a system that they should be at the
center of.
This is not an accident. This is a political choice.
And it raises a simple question: Who is the system being
redesigned for?
Because it is not being redesigned for the public.
Overwhelmingly, public opposition has made that clear.
We already know that more than 27,000 people submitted on earlier
proposals, with over 90% opposition.
Nine out of 10 submitters said no.
And yet here we are. This bill is being brought forward anyway,
rushed with only some parts walked back after public
backlash. That is not good process.
That is not democratic accountability.
That is a government deciding it knows better than the people it
represents.
We've already seen one example of this, the proposal to remove minimum
size limits for commercial fishers.
Only after immense public pressure did the minister back down,
and we're yet to see that manifest in the actual legislation.
But New Zealanders need to understand that this was just one part
of a terrible bill. Because the rest of the bill still weakens
oversight, reduces transparency, and tilts the playing field towards
industry. This is about weakening accountability while protecting
industry. We know there are serious issues in the fishing sector.
When cameras were introduced onboard vessels, they revealed what had long
been suspected, underreporting
bycatch and waste is at much higher levels than
previously thought. That transparency was a step forward.
But now, instead of building on that progress, this bill goes
backwards. It limits public access to that footage, it restricts
scrutiny, and it introduces fines of up to
$50,000 for sharing that information.
Now we need to think about that.
They are proposing harsher penalties for exposing
potential wrongdoing than many of the penalties faced for the
wrongdoing itself.
That is a political signal about whose interests are being protected,
and it is not the public interest. Because the direction of
travel has been clear from the beginning.
Corporate interests over long-term sustainability.
This bill poses a question about the kind of country we
want to be.
Do we want to be a country where our ocean and nature
itself are treated as short-term
commodities? Or do we want to be a country that protects and
values the natural world so that everyone can share in it
now and in the future?
Do we want a system designed around export growth at
any cost?
This bill is a clear statement from this government that industry interests
come first. Public access comes second.
Environmental protections are negotiable.
And overwhelming public opposition can be
ignored.Green Party
fervently opposes this legislation.
We urge the committee to reject this bill, but more than
that, we'd only want to defend the status quo.
We can and should go further. We need to ban
bottom trawling and protect at least 30% of our oceans,
because there is no separating the economy from the environment
that sustains all of us.
Because New Zealanders deserve better than a system that sells off our environment,
weakens accountability, and sidelines the public voice.
We can have fisheries that are sustainable, transparent,
and fair, but this bill is not the way to get there.
Thank you.
Thank you, Steve.
Any questions?
Doesn't seem so.
Thank you very much.
We'll move on. Is the Parliamentary Commissioner
team here? Oh, excellent.
So next up, we have the Parliamentary Commissioner for the Environment.
So we've got,
I assume it's Rebecca here in person, and you have
some online as well. Is that correct?
Mr. Chair, they should be here in person.
Okay.
I had the benefit of just being next door, so I was able to just walk straight
through. But I'm sure they'll be here in due course.
Okay.
Wouldn't want to hold the committee business up.
So
you have 20 minutes.
Kia ora. Thank you.
So, fire away.
Look, members, Mr. Chair, the commissioner is currently on
leave and cannot attend committee today. I'm sorry.
However, this oral submission has been signed off from him.
I'm Rebecca Thornley, the commissioner's general counsel, and
hopefully will be joined by several colleagues shortly.
This submission is made in the context of the PCE's functions
under Section 16 of the Environment Act,
undertaken with a view to maintain or improve the
environment, spanning the entire environmental management
system of which fisheries management is a part.
The PCE submission today will address three aspects that were not
covered in the written submission.
These are the impact on fisheries decisions, including
standard factors,
application of the Official Information Act, and access to
onboard camera footage,
and the interface between the Fisheries Act and the Resource Management
Act, which at the moment may be replaced by the Planning
Bill and Natural Environment Bill.
Turning to the first point of decision making.
This bill substantially changes the way that the minister will
make total allowable catch
decisions. While some of these changes are
discussed in the written submission,
I address the introduction of standard factors as
decision-making criteria.
Standard factors limit the extent to which the minister
can take into account environmental principles when
setting the TAC,
which otherwise apply to all persons exercising
functions and powers under the Act.
This was part of the fundamental design of the
1996 Act.
These principles and the philosophy that
sustainability underpins TAC decisions are
consistent with New Zealand's international obligations under
UNCLOS, as originally endorsed by this very
committee in its final report on the Fisheries Bill in
1996.
Standard factors include the environmental conditions that affect
specified stock and the social,
cultural, and economic factors the minister considers
relevant.
By limiting the application of the environmental principles,
not prioritizing environmental factors over this list of
other matters,
and the reference to TAC being removed from sustainability
measures,
TAC decisions will fail to uphold the fundamental
purpose of fisheries management.
I'd like to introduce my colleague, Geoff Simmons, our Chief Advisor, Strategy and
Policy.
Kia ora. Just in time.
Over the long term, setting TAC should be entirely a matter of
responding to biophysical realities.
Imposing concepts like quota management areas and maximum sustainable
yield for single stocks onto complex and
mobile biological systems isn't
straightforward. As EDS points out, in the
absence of other tools addressing localized biophysical
issues will sometimes require maintaining or building a
greater abundance of stock than maximum sustainable yield
would suggest.
Social, cultural, and economic factors don't alter that
biophysical reality. If adjustments in TAC are
needed, it may be possible to do that in a way that considers
social, cultural, and economic realities in the short
term.
However, in the long term, consideration of social, cultural,
and economic factors will detract from the necessary focus on
biophysical realities to the detriment of both the marine
environment and fisheries.
We acknowledge that the TAC may not always be the ideal
place to embed the consideration of all environmental impacts
of fishing.Ideally, there would be greater use of
spatial planning,
particularly different kinds of marine reserves, and potentially
some maximum size limits for catch in certain areas.
Managing fisheries solely through TAC decisions is really
our second-best policy response.
However, in lieu of other spatial protection tools, the
TAC is all that we have.
Mm.
And our recommendations on this issue are to not exclude
TAC from sustainability measures,
do not limit the consideration of environmental principles to the
standard factors, and make explicit that environmental
conditions affecting stock is the primary consideration, but
the minister may have regard to social, cultural, and economic
factors.
Mr. Chair, moving to the application of the OIA and access to
onboard camera footage.
The bill proposes to exclude application of the OIA to
camera recordings and instead provides limited
circumstances in which disclosure may occur.
The policy rationale does not establish the risk that this
amendment seeks to address based on the number of
OIA requests that have been made and the volume of camera
footage that has been disclosed since the requirement was
introduced. As we understand it, as at
12 March 2025, MPI had received
14 OIA requests, but we are not aware of any
footage having been released so far.
The policy problem, which is outlined in appendix four of the
regulatory impact statement,
is that privacy and commercially sensitive information may be
disclosed through an OIA release.
However,
the OIA
has always provided for the withholding of information
on a number of grounds, including the protection of privacy.
It appears, Mr. Chair, that there is no convincing evidence to
explain why these existing protections are inadequate.
The transparency that access to camera footage brings with it
incentivizes operators to comply with catch management
requirements. It ensures accuracy in reporting
requirements,
and as the ombudsman has submitted,
it upholds the purposes of both the OIA and the
Fisheries Act.
Mr. Chair, I also provide a comparison
to that even heavily protected national security information
where the need for secrecy is so well justified and
understood. This remains subject to
oversight and public assurance through the Inspector General of
Intelligence and Security.
The PCE recommends that the OIA should continue to
apply to onboard footage.
But if the committee is seeking assurances relating to disclosure,
we note that the ombudsman has suggested an amendment to the
OIA to that effect and is prepared to issue guidance
to assist.
The PCE supports the submission of the ombudsman, which the
committee should carefully consider.
Finally, Mr. Chair, turning to the interface between the Fisheries Act
and RMA reform.
Through the decision of the Court of Appeal in the case of Mōtiti,
it was confirmed that the RMA had a wider focus than the Fisheries
Act, protecting biodiversity and natural character
values in the coastal marine area for their own sake
rather than for their connection to the utilization of fisheries resource.
This decision provided councils with clear criteria to
apply when they are developing rules which would impact fisheries
management.
However, this was responded to by the Resource Management
Consenting and Other System Changes Amendment Act 2025,
which constrained the scope of the rules that can be imposed by
regional councils.
In doing so, it muddied the clarity that was provided by the Court of
Appeal.
It introduced a process which confuses the performance
of functions under the two acts.
For example,
despite being prohibited by RMA Section 30
subsection 2 from undertaking functions
regarding fisheries management,
the process requires council to comprehensively assess
the impacts on fishing, despite regional councils not
being fisheries experts.
The concurrence of the Director General of MPI on proposed
rules is also required,
though their decision to concur is limited in its
scope and does not include consideration of the
purpose or the principles of the Fisheries Act.
These changes to the RMA are carried over into the Planning Bill
and Natural Environment Bill, which are currently before another
select committee.
This bill seeks to weaken environmental
considerations that fisheries decisions should be
having regard to.
The Fisheries Act, if amended, would no longer provide
assurance that fisheries management will be grounded in the
biophysical constraints of the marine environment.
Weakening environmental considerations under both
legislative schemes that are supposed to protect marine
biodiversity
means considerable riskFor degradation of the marine
environment and fisheries.
Mr. Chair, that concludes the prepared comments from the PCE, and we're happy to
take questions from members.
Very good.
Thank you.
We've got a question from Rachel first.
Okay. Thank you, Mr. Chair. Thank you for your submission.
I'm keen to ask for your thoughts on part of the bill that you haven't
actually commented on. So I'm hoping you have considered this,
and that's the part around the carry forward of ACE.
So, as you'll be aware, there's an annual catch
entitlement, and
there are some species that can currently have up to 10%
carry forward. And what the bill would allow is, in extreme
circumstances, a 100% carry forward if the
minister made that determination.
There have been some concerns raised about that, which I share, around
that could have an impact on the sustainability of a stock.
So I'm just interested in whether you've considered that particular part of the
bill,
any suggestions you might have to improve it,
any concerns you might have around the sustainability measures.
We haven't looked at that one, unfortunately.
No, not in any great detail.
Okay.
Yeah.
We're more than happy to receive questions, Mr.
Chair, from members if you would like written feedback from the PCE on this.
I'd really appreciate that one. So the particular issue, there's some really good
examples
where it has been used and then hasn't been used.
So rock lobster gives some good examples.
During COVID, there was an order in council so that they could
transfer quota after a market collapse, and then they
considered it
after Cyclone Gabrielle and decided not to do a
carryover. The concern that's been raised is at the moment it's
10%, this would allow 100%, and is there
enough information on the stock, all of those things.
So yeah, if you could provide us with some written advice on that particular issue,
I'd appreciate that.
Yeah. I think what we could do afterwards is
get the-
Some written questions
... written questions.
Yeah.
Yeah. Steve, you had a question.
Thank you very much for the submission.
In your decision making
under uncertainty, you point out the effective assessment requires
biological and ecological information, catch composition, size, age structure,
to estimate biomass, population dynamics, all of these factors.
And yet, if I understood correctly, you just articulated that you did
support the minister taking into consideration environmental,
social, and cultural factors as well as the biological.
My concern in that is what are, particularly the
economic, social, or cultural factors.
Culture is in a different category, I think, but what are the economic or
social factors that would override a
biological need to reduce the
catch?
Yeah. As
I indicated, we see that as a short term consideration, and I
think
the current drafting of the bill does allow for
those considerations to be taken
into the decision making process when thinking about
a transition. So if
reductions have to be made, how is that
managed from an economic and a social perspective?
And I think the current system
is working well in that respect.
So I think that in the short term, those sorts of factors can be
taken into consideration, but in the long term, it's inappropriate.
As a supplement.
Yeah.
It seems to me a concern, and it seems to me a
weakening of the basic
evaluation of the ecological health of the stock
to
allow the minister to consider economic
things, unless that's within a very narrow
scope of something like what you just described.
So would you want to see greater clarification
of the extent to which those factors could be considered,
and in such a way as they don't override the
ecological and biological reality of the health of the ecosystem and the stock?
Mm-hmm.
Yeah.
Yes, and I think that the current drafting of the act allows for that.
Oh.
Yeah.
Right. Rachel.
Just to sup on that, because this has been a topic of discussion
amongst submitters around the factors that we've, I call them.
I guess
this is something you might need to come back to us again as a written question.
Would you consider, I guess, a hierarchy of the factors in
terms of the importance of which ones are considered?
Because I think that's one of the things.
What's the hierarchy and the order that you would
consider them in terms of which ones carry more weight and which ones don't?
That is certainly a drafting solution that the committee could pursue-
Mm
... and request further
advice from officials about what that might look like if that was what you were
minded to do. We're having very similar conversations at the moment to the
environment committee in relation to the planning and natural environment bills in
terms of the environment, and in this case, the marine environment
will tell you what the biophysical constraints are.
It doesn't matter what decisions are made.
It doesn't matter what hierarchy of considerations you try to apply through the
law. The environment will tell you what is or is not possible.
There will or will not be fish
to be fished. So on that basis,
the submission of the commissioner has been that your biophysical
constraints must be your primary
consideration, not because this house says that
that's what is required. That is simply the environment in which you are
operating, and that will tell you what is required.
Rachel.
I do have a sup on that.
Sorry.
Which I guess one of the challenges in the ocean, and
againHappy for you to come back. The challenges in the ocean
is that we can't see all of it, right?
And so unlike making land-based assessments, in terms
of the biological impacts of the ocean,
the ability to see everything that's out there is so limited, both in terms of fish
stock, but then other parts of ocean health.
So, have you got any thoughts
about investment that's needed to
actually get that level of information so that we can make the decision about the
impact on the environment?
So these are questions that we would welcome certainly following
this submission today. Unfortunately, our chief scientist
is also currently on leave, but both he and the commissioner are returning next
week and would be the best placed expert to assist with providing
information to the committee on those matters.
But I do draw your attention to our written
submission in the section Decision Making Under Uncertainty,
where we do discuss these sorts of issues and talk about
how
a more precautionary approach might work in
that
stocks that have good information have
more flexibility than stocks with poorer information.
And those are the sorts of incentives that could be built into the system.
Yeah.
Steve, you're this up.
Yeah. I guess the concern is when you say the biophysical limits of the ocean
will be self-evident, there will or there will not be fish.
I guess what we're trying to do is manage so that there are fish because clearly
when there has been evidence that a fishery is in trouble,
there hasn't been sufficient rapidity of intervention to
protect the remaining stock so that it can recover more
quickly. The Hawke fishery being a recent example, I
guess.
And our concern, just to belabor this point
somewhat, is that if we give scope for other
considerations than simply the available evidence on the
biological and the ecological health of the fishery,
then that will tend to want to override
the evidence that the fishery can't handle the
current take.
Again, as Geoff responded, we'd point you to the relevant part of our written
submission, but we'd be certainly-
If you don't disagree with that-
We'd be happy to provide more information if you had a further question or
statement you wanted to put to the commissioner, Geoff.
Yeah. What I would say at a high level is that
the design of the QMS was intended to create
incentives for self-regulation.
And I think the fact is that that's worked in some fisheries and
not others, and that requires a much deeper
analysis on the interplay between
the different players in the fisheries system.
I think
the answer to your question would be it depends on the fishery.
Yeah.
And a lot more analysis would be required to
really get into that.
Yeah. Susan.
You said it that towards the end of your submission, it seems perverse to
knowingly undermine access to information about our fish stocks.
I just wondered what you meant by that because I would've thought that actually
we've got better information about our fish stocks now than we had sort of 20 or 30
years ago or even before and it seems to be improving.
But just in particular what you meant by it seems perverse to knowingly
undermine access to information about our fish stocks.
We draw your attention to the
paragraph under Decision Making Under Uncertainty, which
catalogs that there has been, in recent years, a fall in the
overall funding for research both from
the fisheries sector and the Crown.
So that's what we are referring to there.
Okay.
So talking about the... Sorry, you're talking about the amount of research,
the funding of research-
That's right
... specifically?
Yeah.
Okay.
I'll give my burning question to my
colleague-
So just-
... Susan.
Yeah. Just-
Last question
...
burning question is you talked about fish stocks as being the kind of
primary
consideration, but would you agree that actually ocean health as well
matters and that there needs to, that it's not just about fish
stock, but actually the importance of the role the ocean
plays,
yeah, is an important consideration.
Again, I draw your attention to our written submission, in
the last section on failure to move towards an integrated approach to fisheries
management.
Some of the criticisms
that exist about the QMS currently are that it takes
a single species approach.
And what the commissioner is saying here is that really these
changes are doubling down on that.
We're moving even more to a
more single species approach
than
previously.
So
yes, of course, we would advocate for a system which
takes a broader perspective, but as I said
previously,
the tools that exist within the system are not ideal
for that. And we have spoken
previously in other submissions about the need for marine
spatial planning.
Yeah.
And that that sort of approach would give you more tools to
deal with ecosystem impacts,
rather than trying to do everything through setting tac.
Yeah.
Thank you very much. We've come to time.
And I'm sure we'll have you back in
at some stage in the future for various issues, so.
Great.
And yeah, do
get in touch with written questions-
Yeah
... we'll get to.
We'll probably put together some question
far through for post-hearing
inquiry. Thank you. Got them. Thank you very much.
Right. Next we've got a
change to the
agenda.
We were
due to have
Gisborne Fisheries- Yeah, what happened to Selvadurai? Selvadurai. He's on a plane.
Yeah. So- Delayed. I don't know. He said
he couldn't make it. He's on a plane ...
we've got Deep Sea Conservation Coalition
instead.
So they're going to be by Zoom or-
Online ... they're online now.
Good morning. Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
We have Duncan Currie, who's the legal advisor for
Deep Sea Conservation Coalition online.
You have 10 minutes. How you use that time's up to you.
So, fire away.
Thank you, Chair, and good morning members of the committee.
Tena koutou.
Thank you for the opportunity to speak today.
Our interest in this bill is simple.
We are seeking stronger protection for the ocean, particularly from
destructive fishing methods such as bottom trawling on seamounts and similar deep
sea features.
This bill takes New Zealand's fisheries management in the opposite direction.
Our recommendation is that the Fisheries Amendment Bill be withdrawn
in its entirety.
We do not say this because fisheries management is perfect, it is not.
Reform is needed, but this bill is not the reform that New Zealand needs.
It weakens environmental safeguards, reduces transparency,
shuts non-industry voices out of decision-making, and makes it harder for
unlawful decisions to be challenged.
I will focus on five core concerns.
Firstly, that the bill removes fundamental environmental guardrails from fisheries
management.
The Fisheries Act currently contains clear environmental principles.
Those principles require decision-makers to maintain associated and
dependent species above a level that ensures their long-term
viability, that's Section 9A,
maintain biological diversity in Section 9B, and protect
habitats of particular significance for fisheries management in Section 9C.
These are the foundation of sustainable fisheries management.
They're not optional extras.
But the proposed Clause 13F would allow the minister, in setting
catch limits, to take into account
adverse environmental effects and environmental principles only to the extent they
are relevant to narrower standard factors.
In practical terms, this could mean the minister could treat a fishery in isolation
rather than part of a wide ocean ecosystem.
It risks taking us backwards towards a narrow single species
approach. This is inconsistent with science,
it is bad policy, and it is inconsistent with New Zealand's international
obligations.
Under the Law of the Sea Convention, New Zealand must take into account the effects
of fishing on species associated with or dependent
upon harvested species.
And under the UN Fish Stocks Agreement, New Zealand must assess impacts
on target stocks, associated independent species, and the
wider ecosystem and apply the precautionary approach.
Clause 13F risks
New Zealand routinely
failing against these obligations.
Secondly, the bill shuts stakeholders and the public out of
decision-making.
The bill would allow the minister to set TACs for multiple years, with quotas
rolling over automatically.
Once that multi-year decision is made, there may be no annual opportunity
for stakeholders to scrutinize the settings, respond to new information, or
raise concerns.
This is deeply concerning. Fish populations can decline,
ecosystems can change, climate impacts can intensify,
new bycatch information can emerge, and new habitat impacts can be
withdrawn. Yet under this bill, decisions could effectively continue on
autopilot.
This bill also allows non-regulatory measures to proceed without consultation
for any reason.
This is an extraordinarily broad discretion and could apply,
for example, to voluntary measures proposed by industry.
This would shut out public tangata whenua, environmental organizations,
rec fishers, and other stakeholders out of decisions affecting the
health of the ocean.
Third, the bill erodes transparency by burying onboard camera
footage. You've heard a great deal about this.
Cameras help build trust, but only if the information they
gather can be meaningfully scrutinized.
In effect, footage of what happens on fishing vessels may never see
the light of day.
Privacy concerns can be addressed through proportionate tools such as blurring
faces, releasing still images, releasing short
segments, redacting sensitive material, or providing
summaries where necessary.
The maximum fine for releasing camera footage also creates an
absurd imbalance. You've heard a great deal about this.
Fourth, the bill risks incentivizing less
selective and more destructive fishing.
We're particularly concerned about the changes to deemed
values and discarding rules. Deemed values are supposed to create a
financial disincentive for catching fish above quota
or catching species a fisher does not have quota for.
But the bill would allow a lower alternative deemed value for
non-targeted fish immediately frozen at sea.
The current minister has already indicated an intention to use this for
deep water freezer vessels.This would create a
perverse incentive for industrial offshore fishing methods,
including bottom trawling, over more selective and low-impact
methods.
Fifth, the bill sets an unworkable timeframe for judicial review.
The proposed Clause 313A would restrict the
timeframe
for filing judicial review proceedings to 20 working days.
This is simply unrealistic and insulates decision-making from lawful
scrutiny.
So what should be done? We agree that fisheries reform is needed, but
it should be a reform that starts from the need for a healthy ocean, because
healthy fisheries depend on healthy ecosystems.
More than 100,000 people have supported calls to end bottom
trawling on seamounts and similar deep sea features, and
more than 73,000 people recently supported Live Ocean's call
to action to phase out bottom trawling, including the immediate protection of
seamounts.
This is a public mandate for stronger ocean protection.
This is not a public mandate for weakening environmental principles,
reducing transparency, limiting consultation, and restricting access
to judicial review.
In closing, we recommend that the committee recommends this entire bill be
withdrawn,
and instead the government begins a genuine review of fisheries management,
one which does not take this bill as its starting point, and one that asks how
New Zealand can move towards selective, sustainable,
low-impact fishing while protecting taonga species, critical
features like seamounts and other vulnerable marine ecosystems.
The review should consider the work already being done through the EEZ
Benthic Forum
and the recommendations made by environmental NGOs to protect seamounts.
This bill weakens the environmental principles of the Fisheries Act, gives
too much discretion and power to ministers,
reduces transparency and public participation, and hides information
from scrutiny. It makes it harder to
challenge unlawful decisions.
In closing, New Zealand can have fisheries that provides food and
livelihoods, and you've heard this today.
A prosperity of fisheries begins with the protection of the ocean they depend upon.
This bill will not achieve that. For these reasons and others,
in our written submission, the Deep Sea Conservation Coalition urges the
committee to recommend that the Fisheries Amendment Bill be
withdrawn in its entirety. Ngā mihi.
Thank you very much, Duncan. Now we're going to a question from
Steve Abel.
Yeah. Thank you, Duncan, for such a substantive and clear
submission. Can you just expand,
for the benefit of the committee, on the Clause 40 deemed value stuff
and how that
could incentivize more bottom trawling over
more sustainable fishing methods
and the perverse incentive it creates?
Yeah, that's right. Well, it's really getting it the other way around because
deemed values are supposed to, as I said, create a financial disincentive for
catching fish above quota or catching
species
that a fisher does not have quota for.
Yeah.
But the bill would allow a lower alternative deemed value to be
set for non-targeted fish immediately frozen at sea.
And that's where the perverse incentive would be.
It would move the incentive towards offshore fishing
methods and industrial fishing
over more selective and lower impact
methods. And we believe that New Zealand should be working towards more selective,
low impact, more sustainable fishing rather than create these sorts of
loopholes that reward indiscriminate fishing methods.
One for another. Yeah. Just to sup on that, if that's all right.
Do you not think,
in that case, with the deemed values, if
that goes against the fisheries
quota, so it's counted as their quota, then that
would not be an incentive for fishing methods
and targeted species to be
more
specific?
Not if that's really clear.
Well, no, because
they're going to be lower deemed values, and therefore, that's
really the inherent disincentive there,
as I see it.
Steve, you had another question.
Well, I was just going to ask about the carryover A stuff,
catch entitlements.
You
flagging that as a challenge, but the conversation that's been going
on is about the
reasonable expectation that if a fisher is not taking their quota one
year, that they should have some ability to take a bit more the next, but you
think that's a flawed idea?
We do, because
you need to have the assessment year by year.
That's our point, is that the ocean changes, fisheries change.
We mentioned climate change.
The stocks can collapse or move. We've seen all of these happening in real
time in the orange roughy fishery, for example.
And so
by setting multi-year TACs, you're simply
putting the fisheries management on
autopilot, and you don't have the annual scrutiny to ensure that your
fisheries allocation is going to be sustainable. We think it's very dangerous.
Yeah.
Just a quick side, because multi-year TACs and carryover are two different
mechanisms in the bill.
Correct.
And so the carryover one, a question I've asked some who
have raised the concerns, which I share, is
if we do actually have evidence that there isn't going to be an impact on the
sustainability of the stock, would you support it in those circumstances?
I think the carryover provisions are like
multi-year
TACs in the sense that, again, they increase
the pressure on the fish stocks and also
non-fisheries impacts such as impacts on vulnerable
marine ecosystems. That's, I think, one of our
core contingent or core problems we have
with
carryover is that there's really very little
evidence that they'll do anything other than increase the intensity of fishing
pressure on those fish stocks and on associated independent species
such as bycatch and VMEs. I think that's really the
core of our concern, Ms. Boyack.
Thank you.
Thank you very much, Duncan. We've come to time.
We appreciate you taking the time to submit to the
committee.
Thanks, Duncan.
Excellent. Thank you, committee. Kia ora.
Thank you.
Now we're moving on to the Royal Forest and Bird Society,
and they're going to be via Zoom as well.
Good
morning. Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
And you have 10 minutes
for your submission.
How you use your time's up to you,
and I'll leave it with you.
Thank you, Chair. Tēnā koutou katoa.
Ko Erika Tongen toku ingoa. I am the acting Chief Executive of Forest
and Bird, and joining me today, also on Zoom, are my colleagues Richard
Kepi and May Downing.
So, Forest and Bird is Aotearoa's biggest environmental charity.
We work across all environmental domains, including the oceans from
coast to deep sea.
We speak today on behalf of our 100,000 supporters who live,
work, and volunteer in communities across the country and who are drawn from
all political walks of life.
Forest and Bird has participated in various legislative processes
culminating in marine protected areas from the Pollen Island
Marine Reserve to the newly protected areas in the Hauraki Gulf.
We've also fought hard in the courts on fisheries right up to the
Supreme Court, where we successfully argued that when determining stock
recovery
periods for tarakihi, the rebuild period is
based on biological and environmental conditions for the stock,
and that it excludes social, cultural, and economic considerations.
Ms. Downing will address you a bit further on that today.
With New Zealand having the fourth largest EEZ in the world and being a
renowned marine biodiversity hotspot, it is absolutely imperative
we get the legal framework for fisheries management and sustainability
right.
Like the vast majority of submitters on this bill and people up and down the
country, we feel the bill is fundamentally flawed and it
should be withdrawn.
It will lead to uncertainty and environmental degradation.
The alleged benefits will only accrue to a small number of quota holders
and only in the short term,
to the detriment of both the environment but also the wider fishing
stakeholders,
including the fishers themselves in the long term.
This bill is not about sustainability.
It would lead to pillaging of our oceans with a long-term cost.
We say the bill should be withdrawn in full, and
officials should be directed back to the drawing board to consider an
ecosystem-based fisheries management approach.
Our written submission sets out our concerns in more detail, but in the
event that the bill is retained, my colleague May will now draw your
attention to some of the most egregious proposed amendments.
Over to you, May.
Thanks, Erika. Tēnā koutou. My name is May Downing.
I am the acting General Counsel at Forest and Bird.
As Erika mentioned, our view is that the bill is so flawed
that it should be thrown out completely.
However, the government did wish to try and resuscitate this
legislation.
I'd just like to draw the committee to a few key
points that we find particularly troubling.
Firstly, the ability to consider social,
cultural, and economic factors when determining rebuild periods
needs to be removed.
The proposed amendments in Clause 10 of the bill seek to overturn the
Supreme Court decision on tarakihi, and
we say they are inconsistent with the statutory purpose of the act.
Under Section 13 ( 2 ) of the Fisheries Act, the minister
is required to set a TAC for a stock at a level that will
enable the stock's recovery within a period
appropriate to the stock and any environmental
conditions affecting that stock.
Under Section 13 ( 3 ) , the minister is to have regard to relevant
social, cultural, and economic factors when considering the
way in which and rate at which a stock is moved
towards or above a level that can produce the maximum
sustainable yield.
Now, the Supreme Court in the tarakihi decision confirmed that the
minister must assess the period appropriate to the stock by
reference to the biological
characteristics and environmental conditions, which I understand
other submitters have referred to as the biophysical limits,
and without regard to social, cultural, and
economic factors.The court also found that where
the stock's biological characteristics and environmental conditions
allow for more than one appropriate recovery period,
that's where the social, cultural, and economic factors can then
be engaged. That's where that can
be referred to in selecting an alternative or the
appropriate rebuild period.
Now, the bill replaces this approach with the requirement to only
consider the scientifically appropriate period as one of
many competing factors, including social and economic
factors that the minister considers relevant.
If rebuild periods are set by reference to social and
economic factors, the fishing industry is then
able to influence the rebuild period and make it entirely
lawful to set longer and more unsustainable
rebuild periods, and longer rebuild periods allow
higher total allowable catches.
The outcome is a fish stock that is held at a very
low level for longer, making the stock more vulnerable to sharp
decline if unpredictable environmental changes are
experienced, and this reduces the species' ability to have
a role in the wider ecosystem.
For these reasons, scientific and environmental
considerations should override other factors when determining the
rebuild period.
Such considerations are fundamentally about the health and sustainability
of the fishery, the wider ecosystem, and basically
ensuring future generations can also fish.
If the bill is not thrown out, we seek that sections
13B, clauses four, five, and six, and we can
provide these to the committee afterwards, are removed.
And we also seek that sections 13 ( 2 ) and
13 ( 3 ) of the act are left alone.
Ultimately, you can't enjoy the social, cultural,
and economic benefits of a thriving fishery without the fish in the
first place.
The next point is about the minimum size
limits in the fisheries regulations.
We understand the government was going to drop this proposed
amendment, which is positive, but it's still within the
bill, and we note that this is one of many things that should be
dropped.
The bill
proposes to amend the fisheries commercial fishing regulations to
remove minimum size limits.
Allowing the take of undersized fish disrupts natural life
cycles, reduces future breeding capacity, and risks the total
collapse of fish stocks.
Length limits should be retained to discourage their take.
The ability to carry over ACE under
proposed new section 67C and 67D
should also be removed.
Saving uncaught annual catch entitlement and carrying it
forward onto other fishing years means large amounts of uncaught catch can
accumulate. This could lead to excessive fishing pressure in
a single season and decrease sustainability by
potentially causing a catastrophic decline in fish stocks, which are
unable to recover quickly enough.
If a higher than expected catch happens due to carry forward,
it can disrupt the ecosystem and food web and affect
predator-prey relationships.
I now move on to the provisions on camera recordings.
We say that subpart five, which deals with camera
recordings, should be removed, in particular section
227H, which prevents the OIA from
applying to camera recordings. This provision
is essentially using a sledgehammer to crack a nut.
There's been a modest amount
of OIA requests for recordings. As of April
2025, 10 of 15 have been fully withheld
on the basis of commercial sensitivity or protecting the
maintenance of the law.
There have been no complaints upheld by the ombudsman that
information was improperly released in breach of
requirements of commercial sensitivity or privacy,
and we say that there are already sufficient safeguards in existing
legislation to protect these things.
Exempting camera footage from the OIA is also not a
legitimate public policy approach and significantly undermines
public confidence and transparency in the fishing
industry. And the last point
I draw your attention to is the time limit on
filing judicial reviews.
Judicial reviews are a critical mechanism for upholding the rule of
law.
They enable the courts to scrutinize decisions and actions of public
bodies, ensuring they are lawful, fair, and reasonable,
and decision-makers should be held accountable to retain public trust.
A time limit is also ill-suited to the Fisheries Act,
where sufficient time is often required to gather
and obtain large amounts of technical information before deciding on
whether a claim is even necessary.
It may risk parties bringing claims when they're not required for the sake of
getting them filed on time.
Thank you.
I'll now hand back to Erica or Richard.
Right.
I think we've actually run out of time. Is that correct, Chair?
You got 30 seconds.
Okay. Well, perhaps I'll pass over to questions then.
Okay.
Question. That was great, though. Thank you.
GreatStephen.
Just a very quick one. Explain to us why you
are particularly against the inclusion of economic, social, and
cultural considerations.
Mae, would you like to take that one?
I can, and someone can jump in if I haven't quite captured it.
But in a nutshell, it's when
setting that rebuild period, the first thing that we
need to get right is ensuring that the biophysical limits are
properly set. It's only after that, if
those biophysical limits
provide for an array of different recovery
periods
which are ecologically safe, for want of a better description,
we say that's when it's appropriate for economic factors to be considered.
If there's a choice that means that the rebuild can
occur within that biophysical limit.
Thank you very much.
We've come to time.
Thanks for taking the time to
present to us today.
Thank you, committee.
Yeah.
Right. Now,
we move on
to Sea Eagle Fishing Limited.
Oh, they're in person. Very good.
So I understand we have Samuel and
Kristy Penwarden.
Penwarden.
Good morning.
You have 10 minutes.
So the time is yours.
Good morning. Thank you for your time today and for the opportunity to speak with
you.
My name is Kristy Penwarden. This is my brother, Samuel.
Together we run our family fishing business.
We're independent, operating primarily in the scampi fishery.
Our late father, Neil, was a pioneer in the scampi fishery and
established this business in 1990.
However, he
was involved in fishing from the 1970s in the US and
Australia.
We currently operate two vessels, one of which has been in our family since
1989. In fact, I actually refer to her as my younger
sister.
Our other vessel was a purpose-built vessel
specifically for fishing scampi, and was
commissioned in 2019 and was a demonstration of our commitment to the
industry.
Working our family business, picking up where Dad left off is a
privilege, and we take great pride in what we do.
Dad loved the ocean. He was a fisher, a surfer, a diver-
Excuse me
... and shared that love and respect of the sea with
us.
I actually don't have many childhood memories or family memories that don't
involve fishing, both recreational and commercial.
It's actually all, well, I've ever known, Sam's ever known,
since Dad was fishing before I was born, Sam was born. He's my younger brother.
But I do remember as a child, spending a lot of time in the shipyards
when the boat was in dry dock for refit, as in those early days,
Dad did a lot of the work himself. As such, I
genuinely feel like the fabric of our family is
interwoven with our business.
It's actually something our children, we have five between us, they often talk
about
picking up one day and taking on.
Dad was not only a pioneer in the scampi fishery, he was
also a pioneer in talking about the health and sustainability of this
fishery well before anyone else was, and both Samuel
and I have grown up with this ethos.
We know how lucky we are to be the stewards of our business, and it's important
to us that we can balance operating a successful business
operation that supports many local businesses throughout New Zealand
with ensuring the sustainability that our sector is managed.
And I'd like to hand over to Sam, who will talk specifically
about the submission.
Thank you for the opportunity to present today and contribute to the committee's
consideration of the bill.
Following on from my sister's introduction, I'm the director of our family's
fishing operations.
I had a separate career as a professional structural design engineer before
returning home in 2010 to assist Dad.
Like my father, I'm an avid recreational fisherman, surfer, and
diver. I've always had a great love for the ocean.
I traveled to be in person as the amendment to a
fundamental and good bill like the Fisheries Act does not happen often.
The importance of getting this right is paramount.
We're in a world of advanced technology, science that the original
authors from government, science, and industry could not have anticipated
when this bill was originally written.
These proposed amendments will allow us to use the whole toolbox for
dynamic and reactive fisheries and marine
ecosystem management. To
oversimplify the engineering talk, this is
essential maintenance on the working machine that is the Fisheries Act.
We support the Amendments Bill in principle.
This maintenance will involve the modernization of the Act to reflect better
data and monitoring, adapt to a more complex environmental and
social expectations, meet the needs for more responsive management
tools. However, we emphasize that fisheries systems
are complex.
Some proposals will need refinement.
Technical issues must be addressed to ensure intended outcomes are
achieved.
We have submitted a comprehensive submission to you, but time restraints do not
allow me to go into it totally.I've been
involved in many plenaries and read countless science reviews, both in our
scampi business and as a director of the Deep Water Group.
And all the time, it has been apparent that our current structure is rich in
data and science but restricted in regulatory bandwidth.
This restricts the quality of the information available to meet
the needs of the marine ecosystem.
We support clarifying the role of the total allowable catch.
Too often, management of our fisheries comes down to the TACC and the
fisheries management areas. These are regulatory tools, not
management tools.
Our current science, whilst robust, is expensive, time-consuming, and
mostly three or four years too late.
It's equivalent of picking out the All Blacks for the World Cup final from the
Bledisloe Cup two years ago.
The proposed amendments will use the new science methods and management tools to
reduce the information feedback loop.
The introduction of tools like time management, spatial management, and
gear-based measures will better meet the needs of the marine ecosystem.
There's a lot of noise about the reliance of catch per unit effort being the
only measure. It's one of just many tools we would have at our
disposal that need to be applied appropriately.
One size does not fit all.
We support the amendments enabling the recognition of non-regulatory
sustainability measures. The minister needs to have the scope to
consider and give appropriate weight to non-regulatory measures.
This is not a new concept. Industry has long
implemented
measures such as ACE shelving, catch spreading, and spatial size limits
to support sustainability. These tools are already part of how
fisheries are actively managed in practice.
However, the Amendment Bill, as it stands, needs more attention to this
area, as we currently risk legal ambiguity.
The current drafts risk being more restrictive than the status quo.
The strength of a non-regulatory measure is its agility to react to
defined indicators and be adjust required and
responsibly.
We support creating tools for multi-layered catch decisions.
The marine ecosystem does not know of calendars and arbitrary
human dates. At best, it dances to its own seasonal tune.
Anything we do needs to be flexible and multi-year, and in most cases,
specific to the species and the location.
We need to use all the tools we have to be prepared to respond to the fishery if
required. There will be times when the best laid plans don't
work or Mother Nature just has other ideas.
We support the protection of onboard camera footage.
The cameras are a regulatory tool, not a public surveillance mechanism,
regardless of how they are funded.
The back deck of a fishing boat is a personal space as much as it's a
workspace. The potential for footage to be taken out of
context and individuals just trying to do their job being
vilified in this day and age of cyberbullying is only just one reason.
Imagine if you are driving your car on a public road and your car
telemetry and car footage was available for the public
digestion and review and judgment.
The public needs to have faith in the regulatory body to do
its job effectively.
The investment we know the fishers quota holders have is
significant and long-term. We operate in generational timelines,
not yearly nor monthly. We fundamentally never work on
short-term gain, long-term loss principles.
The public noise in the amendment that there will be no fish left in the ocean,
excuse me, that as the pun, this does not hold water.
From a pure economic approach, a commercial fisher
will never destroy the most valuable natural resource, thus destroying the
asset value on his vessel or her vessel and quota.
I still struggle to see how people are saying it will exclude iwi.
Iwi have about a 40% share in New Zealand fisheries.
Mm.
They will not and cannot be left out of the argument.
There's this notion that New Zealand public will be excluded from the
discussion. And granted, I'm an engineer, I'm not a solicitor, but I
just don't see how using better science and management tools will do this.
Thank you for your time and the opportunity to speak to you.
Thank you very much. We're going to questions with Rachel first.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you very much for your submission.
Mm.
I've asked this question of a lot of people and it's around the ACE carry forward.
Mm-hmm.
We've heard some examples from rock lobster where it would've been
useful.
Have you had that same situation in your industry?
I can't speak for other fisheries, but for scampi,
ACE carry forward in the bill-
Yeah
... it says up to 100%. But from when I've read it, there are a lot of
checks and balances and very specific to the species.
Scampi,
I would need to look at a scientific review, and you would have to present me with
a very robust scientific study to say, "Yes, we
can take the carry forward above what we have." But there are times when you
can't harvest your ACE, weather
mostly,
that you can't do it. But-
Mm. It's good for humans
... it's not a one size fits all.
Mm.
You need the science to back it up, and you can't just pull a number from
thin air.
Yeah. Thank you.
Yeah. I was just interested in some of the
comments you made around
CPUE and other factors that go
towards calculating
catch and what have you. Could you
give the committee a bit of a insight into what other factors
are used?
That's a good question.
Thanks.
Like I said, there are a lot of tools you need to use.
CPUEFor fisheries that's mature like scampi,
is a good, quick indicator of what you're
seeing. It's not the only indicator, because it can deceive you.
It's subject to increase in fisheries by vessels
improving technology. But we're quite evolved and matured,
so we don't have those giant leaps anymore.
But it also gets skewed by weather,
ability for fleets to range, location,
and temperature
bycatch. So again, you got to take that one
tool
and say, yes, this is an indicator, but you've got to look at
everything else in the picture. It's a very complicated thing.
It's not simple, which is why you have to have your rules.
You need to consider your management.
Whereas if you just take CPUE and TACC,
it is literally like using a cannon to kill a mosquito.
You basically need to approach it more like a surgeon specific to each
operation.
Yeah. Because it has been raised then with the increased
technology, it's
easier, I suppose you could say, to-
It's a barometer.
Yeah. Okay. Well, you've come to time.
Thank you very much for your submission. We really appreciate it.
Thank you. Thank you very much. Thank you. Thank you.
Right. We're going to move on to,
um,
Patu Productions, and we've got
Isaac Te Reina,
if that's how you pronounce it, uh,
to submit on their behalf.
I think he's here.
He's online.
Thank
you.
Isaac, are you there? Can you hear us?
Hi. I can. Hi. Yes.
Hi, Isaac. Is your camera on? Ah, there we are.
There we are.
Hey,
thank you for taking the time to
submit today to the committee.
You have
10 minutes.
Time is yours. Fire away.
Kia ora tatou, tena tatou katoa, morena.
Ko au te moana raukawakawa. Ko te moana
raukawakawa ko au. Ko Isaac Te Reina tene.
I'm speaking to you today as a recreational fisherman, keen diver,
and someone who deeply loves our kaimoana, and a media professional
who knows a thing or two about storytelling.
And the story being presented from this bill is incredibly alarming
and dangerous to our kaimoana.
So I'm providing my truth on what I believe, what story is being told
from this government's fisheries bill.
The government says this bill is about improving efficiency and
responsiveness in fisheries management, but what it's really doing is
weakening environmental protections that move us further away from sustainable
fishing at a time when our oceans are already under immense pressure from
commercial fishers.
We have fished these waters for thousands of years, our diet sustained by
plentiful amounts of fish and sea life.
Aotearoa has been a place of nourishment for our people of this whenua.
Our parents and kaumatua are still able to tell us stories of plentiful
koura, pāua everywhere, and fish in abundance along
our coastlines.
These times are now gone, and that abundance has
declined
dramatically within a single lifetime.
Today, the next generations of fishermen and divers are growing up with scarcity
instead. We see kina barrens, depleted reefs, overfished
areas, and stricter rules on everyday people trying to gather kai for their
whānau.
Meanwhile, large commercial operators continue taking obscene volumes
from our oceans, exporting north of 250,000
tons of fish annually, while we here at home consume only
26,000 tons.
The average cost of all our fish is exported overseas for less than $6
per kg. Every day, New Zealanders are paying exorbitant
prices, often above $25 per kg at supermarkets,
for seafood caught off our own coastlines.
This makes absolutely no sense. We should be ch-
um, we should be, uh, cherishing...
We should, sorry,
we should be charging more for our fish to overseas buyers
and less for our people at home, especially when it becomes
harder and harder to catch a feed. The science and the
common sense are simple. When industrial fishing removes too much from
deep ocean, the entire food chain is affected.
Less baitfish means less food for larger species.
The ecosystem becomes stressed from the bottom up, and us recreational
fishers near the shore are left competing for the scraps of what
remains after these high-tech commercial vessels have already swept
through.
Technology on commercial vessels is becoming more advanced every year.
Fish are easier to locate and catch at scale than ever before.
That should mean stronger safeguards, not weaker ones.
It seems this government is ignoring the science and research that put these
protections in place in the first place.
One of the most concerning parts of this bill is how it attempts to reduce
transparency around onboard cameras.We're told
this is about protecting proprietary commercial information.
Interesting, when this also blocks access and hides the
evidence of any bycatch of our threatened and endangered species, the list of
which is growing. Case after case of our fish species being
increasingly threatened. We fought hard for these cameras to be
installed in the first place to reveal overfishing,
undersized catch, dumping, and et cetera.
But multiple different commercial entities have been fined over one
million dollars for breaching these regulations, and that just isn't enough.
Because commercial companies have incredible financial infrastructure, they
just treat fines like they are business expenses and carry on.
This bill makes it easier for them to continue to act
illegally at the expense of our fish and our people.
Utter ludicrous. At a time when many coastal species are
already declining, reducing accountability is the wrong direction.
We should be here talking about how we are protecting our fish, not just here
defending common sense, sustainable practices.
These safeguards were put in place to avoid ecosystem
collapse. Our oceans should be treated as a
taonga,
something to protect and pass on to future generations, not simply a
resource to maximize profit from at the expense of our stocks
declining.
I'm not against commercial fishing, just to be clear.
It has an important place in our economy and in feeding people
globally. Our fish are clearly of major value to the world.
But supplying overseas buyers cannot come at the expense of sustainable
public New Zealand access to kai moana and the long-term
health of our own oceans.
My worst fear is that future generations will only inherit emptier
coastlines and even higher prices for fish at the shop.
Our children and our mokopuna deserve the opportunity to experience
the same connections to our moana that previous generations once
had. This bill does not protect our valuable, fragile ocean
ecosystem. It is disgraceful.
This is our ocean, these are our coastlines, and we all have a
responsibility to protect them for the generations to come.
So thank you for this opportunity to stand up for our kai moana and our
oceans.
On behalf of recreational fishers, divers, and whanau who enjoy catching
their own kai moana, we reject this bill completely. Kia ora.
Kia ora.
Thank you for your submission, Isaac.
We're going to questions now. We have Steve Abel first.
Kia ora, Isaac. Thank you very much for your powerful submission.
What's your
observations of the health of the fishery and your
actions as a fisher yourself?
Yeah. So, Pukehou Bay, Kapiti Island,
Raukawa Moana.
So I dive a lot off Pukehou Bay and the kina
barrens there are just extreme.
There is no paua left, unless you're in
the protected
marine reserve, which we obviously respect.
But anything outside of that, kina barren.
It's really disheartening.
And sometimes you're really out there for a long time searching for a fish because
of that, because it removes the seaweed,
because it removes all that kai and sure,
yeah, it's just incredible amount of stress for the fish to come in.
And then of course, all the mollusks and stuff like that, paua-
Just-
... to be alive and sustain themselves. Yeah.
Supplement, yes, Steve.
And I
take it, it's your interpretation that it's been the excessive
commercial fishing over years and years that has contributed
to the collapse or the harm in the state
of the ecosystem. So passing a bill like this,
that gives even greater leeway to the commercial
fishers is taking us in exactly the opposite direction to which we need to be
going.
Exactly.
Yeah.
Okay.
Any further questions?
I've got one.
Okay, Helen. Fire away.
You've got time?
Yes.
I was interested in your comments about
the need for people to be able to buy food in New
Zealand at reasonable prices.
Yeah.
I was recently criticized for bringing this up about the issue
over American butter being cheaper than
New Zealand butter.
Mm.
And I was told that was just commercially stupid.
Can you tell me how much are you getting a
reaction to that need to be able to fish for yourself?
Because I've noticed that when I talk to Maori groups in my
area, that's a really big
need.
Yeah.
And also the need to be able to buy food
at a reasonable price. Do you think we're getting that right?
No, there's something incredibly wrong within the supply chain.
I don't know what it is. I'm not an expert in this area.
Sure.
I'm only someone that consumes and fishes myself and talk with other
people out there that do the same thing, but it just doesn't add up.
The level at which we sell our fish overseas in exports,
and then the price that we pay at the shop.
I don't know what's going in between that,
but it just doesn't feel right, and that's why I appreciate being able to
speak about this and raise some awareness.
Mm-hmm.
I'm not an expert in this space. I've only got access to
limited research.
But I care about this issue incredibly, and I don't know why it's happening,
but it's wrong.
And it's not sustainable.
Thank you
Got one final one.
Yes. Make it quick.
You quoted that figure, Isaac, of
locally consumed 26-
Thousand
... thousand Ks, and we export 250,000 tons.
Mm.
And we're exporting that at $6 a kg on
average. Where did you get those figures from?
There's all kinds of statistics online supplied by the government.
Yeah.
So yeah, everything is from the horse's mouth.
Yeah, right.
Trading Economics
is one.
New Zealand exports about fish.
Yeah, there's all kind of information you can find online that is supplied and
is credible by government. So yeah, it's quite alarming when you
just read these figures
and just try and piece together the pieces of what's happening at
commercial level.
Yeah, brilliant. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Isaac. We've come to time.
Thanks for taking the time to submit to the Select Committee.
We really appreciate it. Kia ora koutou. Best of luck.
Thank you.
Right, we're going to move on now to the Hauraki Gulf
Forum.
It's actually online.
And they're online. Okay.
I think we've got a Ms-
Kia ora
Beth.
Kia ora.
Welcome to the Primary Production Select Committee.
Thank you.
You have 20 minutes for your submission,
so fire away.
Kia ora.
Ngā mihi ana ki a koutou e te whakarongo mai. Kia ora koutou.
It's great to see you. I've been looking forward to speaking to you all week,
and it's great to be here.
Sure you have.
I've enjoyed watching some of the other presenters.
So, yeah, it's great to see I'm among such great
company.
My name is Beth Rose, and I'm the executive officer for the Hauraki Gulf Forum.
Tikapa moana te moananui a Toi.
Thank you for inviting me.
I'm stoked to be presenting on behalf of the forum.
I'm going to take our submission as read in the most part because
you have our words there. So I just wanted to provide a bit of context
as to why we were compelled to make a
submission to the Fisheries Amendment Bill 2026.
So from here on in, I will refer to the Hauraki Gulf
Forum as the forum or us or we, depending.
I am a bit of a storyteller, so I'm going to take you on a bit of a haerenga, a bit
of a journey around
Tikapa moana te moananui a Toi, just to explain
why we do not support the bill.
So let's start with the invitation.
The invitation to present today happened to land with me in
possibly one of the most relevant contexts, as I was
on top of Hirakimata Aotea, Great Barrier Island
about to descend the maunga, having spent a couple of days
living in the clouds and among the burrows of the tākokatā, black
petrel.
I have a very diverse role, you'll see.
This manu has gone from the west coast of the South Island
and other places, and so it is an endangered bird.
Its population has shrunk to just here.
And by here, I mean the highest maunga on Aotea.
So it is a tonga species for Ngāti Rehua - Ngāti Wai ki Aotea,
and there is another smaller population on the neighboring motu of Hauturu,
Little Barrier Island. So therefore, it is also a tonga species for
Ngāti Manuhiri as well. It's an endemic manu
nowhere else, and the chicks fledge from the nests here to begin
their migration to South America.
They won't touch land again until they return to within
possibly meters of their nest. That is, if they return, because
the odds are stacked against them.
This means they spend a good proportion of their lives at sea, and they
utterly depend on healthy oceans.
When adults feed their chicks, they are doing so from
Tikapa moana te moananui a Toi.
This whole scenario is emblematic of the
wildlife living within Hauraki Gulf.
Long distance travelers living among permanent residents,
many endemic species relying on the food and shelter
provided by this ecosystem. It is part of what
makes the Hauraki Gulf Marine Park an
internationally significant environment.
Everything is connected, and the tākokatā has a
contribution here too, bringing nutrients from the moana up to the
ngāhere and keeping the soil and invertebrates healthy,
and the forests. They're an example of one species that exists
within a much larger food web.
Everything has its part to play.
But as we are seeing in the moana, when we disrupt the balance, such as
taking too much of one thing out,
ecosystems can fail, and we are seeing that in our oceans through
overfishing. We cannot manage fisheries in
isolation from the ecosystems that sustain
them. So why was I among the burrows,
collecting stories for the state of our gulf?
The forum is required to produce the State of the Gulf every three
years, and I would just note it is a State of the Gulf year this year, and that is
coming up on us very soon.
It provides the most comprehensive long-term assessment of
environmental change in the Marine ParkAnd I'm going to come
to that a little bit later, right after I've provided a little bit more context
about our act. So in the year 2000, Parliament
decided that the Hauraki Gulf Tikapa Moana Te
Moana-nui-a-Toi is a nationally significant marine
environment
that warrants a distinct and integrated management framework due to its
ecological vulnerability, cultural importance, and
cumulative pressures.
Parliament gave effect to this recognition through the
Hauraki Gulf Marine Park Act 2000.
It is Aotearoa, New Zealand's first marine
park, and it was established to recognize and provide for the historic
cultural and spiritual relationship of tangata whenua with the
Hauraki Gulf Marine Park, including its islands, shorelines, and
marine ecosystems. It is 1.2
million hectares, the largest marine park in
Aotearoa. The Hauraki Gulf Marine Park Act
explicitly acknowledges the Hauraki Gulf's national
significance and sets out in sections seven and eight
environmental and cultural values that must be recognized
for. These provisions emphasize the need for
coordinated ecosystem-based management
across land and sea, reflecting both the complexity of the
Hauraki Gulf system and the interconnected
nature of the pressures acting upon it, such
as fishing.
So that's a bit of a reminder about the legislation underpinning the park.
Here's a bit about the forum.
The Hauraki Gulf Forum was established to promote the integrated management and
long-term protection of the Hauraki Gulf, its
islands, and its catchments. It brings together
21 members, including
representation from the Minister for Fisheries,
the Minister for Conservation, and the Minister for Maori Affairs,
Te Puni Kōkiri. It is also made up of members from
Tāmaki Makaurau and Waikato regions, including
six tangata whenua members, five members of Auckland
Council, members from Aotearoa
Great Barrier, a member from Waiheke Local Board, from
Waikato Regional Council, Waikato District Council, Hauraki District
Council, Matamata-Piako District Council, and Thames-Coromandel
District Council. And I do just want to acknowledge our members,
not least our co-chairs, Nicola Rata McDonald
and Councillor Warren Ma, for their interest, energy, and
enthusiasm for this work. The forum has an
intentionally collaborative governance
structure for an area where management responsibilities,
legislative frameworks, and environmental impacts span
multiple jurisdictions, and it upholds Te
Tiriti o Waitangi.
Now that I've had the opportunity to provide this context, I would just like to
note as a broader point,
we are finding that in various reforms and amendments that we have
seen recently, existing legislation such as
our act and the laws and promises within it
are either being ignored, bypassed, or forgotten about.
An example of that is also the Natural Environment Planning
bills, which seek to replace the RMA, which of course, is a piece of
legislation that the Hauraki Gulf Marine Park Act mentions
considerably. There is no mention of our act
in these bills.
There are echoes of the same treatment of
silent bypass when it comes to the Fisheries Amendment
bill and its lack of consideration for
ecosystem-based management, as acknowledged in Sea
Change in the Marine Spatial Plan for the Hauraki Gulf.
In the rush to create efficiencies,
there is a high risk that chaos is created as the main
result.
Then there is an issue of bias.
While we are delighted to welcome the Hauraki Gulf
Tikapa Moana Marine Protection Act last year,
I would like to note that even there in that legislation
to protect the marine environment,
concessions were made for the benefit of
commercial fishing through the allowance of ring net
fishing in high protection areas.
Neither were there any tools created as part of that legislation to
increase protection.
It was limited to just 6% high protection,
which of course is nowhere near the 30% that is
recommended as an international goal.
So how is it that legislation can be developed to protect
the marine environment that then shows sympathy to commercial
fishing within high protection areas,
but then when we're looking at the Fisheries Amendment bill,
no sympathy or acknowledgment is shown towards the broader marine
environment,
indeed, the ecosystems on which these fisheries
depend?
All this is to say that we are looking for more consistency,
consideration,
and common sense across the development of legislation,
please.
Putting these disappointments aside,
the Hauraki Gulf Tikapa Moana Marine Protection Act was acknowledgment from
Parliament that protection was needed due to the ongoing decline of
the Hauraki Gulf.
The enactment demonstrates existing management
settings have not been sufficient to
halt degradation, and that coordinated
place-based intervention
is required to enable ecological recovery.
So as Parliament has already
determinedThe Hauraki Gulf needs
ecosystem-focused management and environmental
protection.
Sorry, pausing.
And must be central to decision-making within the gulf.
And we do not believe that the Fisheries Amendment Bill has been assembled with
that in mind,
or other obligations within the Fisheries Act 1996 that require fishery
settings to provide for the need of future generations.
I would like to move on to some of the evidence that the forum provides
through its reporting that might help give some basis and
direction for our submission,
and that might hopefully be considered in the development of legislation in the
future, whether that is in support of fisheries or to help
regenerate Te Kupumuana-Te Moananui-a-Toi more
generally. So the state of the gulf.
What these reports are showing consistently over time is a pattern of
cumulative decline.
We're seeing the loss of marine habitats, reduced
water quality, and a significant reduction in the
abundance and diversity of marine life.
Once plentiful species such as tipa,
scallops, koura, crayfish, and kutai,
mussels, have either collapsed or are under significant
pressure, and the overall productivity of the
system
has diminished.
Importantly, the report makes it clear that this is not the result of a single
pressure,
but the combined effects of fishing, land-based impacts, climate
change, and historical management decisions that have not
accounted for the system as a whole.
What is particularly striking is that the decline is systemic.
It's not confined to one part of the gulf or one sector.
The State of the Gulf reporting shows that when ecosystems tip out of balance,
impacts are felt across the entire network, from habitats and species through
to fisheries and community experience.
And this reinforces a central point, really, that the forum has
consistently been making. The health of fish stocks
cannot be separated from the health of the ecosystems
that support them.
In that context, the findings of the State of the Gulf align
closely with the economic analysis undertaken by the New Zealand
Institute of Economic Research in 2023,
which demonstrates that the gulf is a multi-billion dollar
natural asset, providing more than 5 billion in
value annually, much of which depends on functioning,
healthy ecosystems. The implication is
clear.
Continued ecological decline is an environmental
issue, not just an environmental issue, but a growing economic
risk, reinforcing the need to place ecosystem
health
at the center of decision-making.
This value extends far beyond traditional
economic measures, including cultural, recreational, and
ecosystem services. When the ecosystem is
degraded, that value is diminished,
and the cost of repairs shifts to the
communities and the public.
So on the topic of cost,
anyone working in the marine environment will be acutely aware of the cost
of doing so. It is such an expensive place to work,
which is why ecosystem regeneration and repair is so
incredibly expensive and time-consuming.
The cost of this, as we've seen in Te Kupumuana, is being picked up
currently by philanthropy and communities,
repairing the reefs from the damage brought about
through the decline of koura, crayfish, and other kina-eating
species.
This work is happening so that we might see the rimurimu
kelp reefs come back to provide the nurseries that our fish
need,
and that we therefore need
for healthy fish stocks. It is hard work, and I would
also like to add that a lot of the expense is unaccounted for, given the
enormous amount of unpaid work that is happening through kaitiakitanga
and volunteerism.
We are so fortunate to have engaged communities and
leadership from Mana Whenua.
So the restoration of these places is hugely important.
We need only to look at the world's first no-take marine
reserve at Cape Rodney-Okakari Point, otherwise known
as Leigh or Goat Island Marine Reserve, which is now over 50
years old and still one of the very few marine protected areas that we have in
this country, to see the important role that healthy
ecosystems do play.
They are fish nurseries. Large, productive tarahumi or
snapper here, along with koura, crayfish, are helping
to grow populations of these species across the
gulf.
Perhaps then we can start to build some legislation
that gets around the thing that we do all agree on, more
fish,
whether that is fish that we catch for ourselves, fishing that
contributes to the economy through sustainable fishing
methods. I haven't mentioned anything about bottom trawling here, which
I could. And commercial operators
of fish that we can see in our waters along coastlines, for
those of us who just like to be in the water admiring our marine
environment, or fish that contribute to the biomass that
supports a healthy ocean and the role that the ocean plays in
absorbing the heatFrom this warming planet of
ours.
So,
whilst we do not support the Fisheries Amendment Bill 2026,
we do believe that the Fisheries Act 1996 needs improving,
and we would love to see a review of the act because fishing methods,
technology, monitoring capability have changed
significantly since these legislative settings were
introduced. At the same time,
fish stocks and marine ecosystems have experienced
growing pressure from overfishing and wider
human-induced impacts, including climate change,
marine heat waves, pollution, and sedimentation.
And just to be clear,
given current management settings have led to fisheries closures due to
collapsing stocks with regards to quota and TPAP particularly,
there's no clearer signal than that to determine that things are
not working as they should be.
We support reform,
but we do not support this bill.
The concern for the forum is that this bill prioritizes flexibility and
efficiency without sufficiently strengthening ecosystem
considerations, transparency, or long-term sustainability
outcomes.
It risks reinforcing the very dynamics that have led to decline, and
the forum's position is that it's a missed opportunity.
We would prefer to see a more comprehensive review of the Fisheries Act
that places ecosystem health at the center of decision-making.
This includes strengthening transparency, maintaining
strong incentives for sustainable fishing behavior,
and aligning with ecosystem-based approaches already being
developed, and we're seeing some of that, what the good of that looks like
through SeaChange, Tai Tīmu Tai Para, Pare, sorry,
and the development of the Hauraki Gulf Fisheries Plan.
These approaches recognize that fisheries outcomes depend on
ecosystem health.
So
I will finish where I began, standing on Haurakimata last
week. It was clear that the health of
ecosystems depends on decisions far beyond
that place.
If we do not align fisheries management with ecosystem reality,
we are not reducing cost. We are simply going to
defer it.
And that cost will ultimately be borne by
communities, by the environment,
and by future generations.
So
thank you,
and I would just like to acknowledge, as I sort of did at the start, all
the people who I have actually seen presenting here earlier in the
week. It's been great to hear all of their perspectives as well.
I do feel like I'm in some really great company and
there's a lot of shared values out there. So ngā mihi.
Ngā mihi. Thanks, Beth.
Thank you, Beth. We've got a question from Rachel Boyack.
Thank you, Chair. Thank you, Beth, and thank you for all the work that you do and
that the forum does.
I've got a specific question related to your written submission.
So bullet point eight,
which is about the ALI
decision in 2025.
Mm.
You've said here that
the bill ignores the direction from the court-
Mm
... and you're concerned about the bill
prioritizing industry certainty.
I'm just interested in the particular clauses of the bill that you've identified,
and if you don't have this information now, it can always come back to us.
But the particular clauses in the bill that you think undermine that
court decision, because that's quite an important thing for us to consider.
We were reflecting there quite broadly on,
it was pointed out last year that
the minister needed to take a whole-of-ecosystem approach.
We don't feel like that's coming across.
Okay.
Yeah, essentially in quite a few aspects.
But
yeah,
it was quite a clear direction. It was a reminder about
putting the ecosystem at the heart of a lot of the
legislation development, and so yeah, we're just not seeing that being
acknowledged here really.
Okay. Thank you.
Thank you very much, Beth.
Kia ora.
Appreciate you taking the time to present to us today.
Thank you.